Revocation Mechanism (#55)
APTITUDE-Consortium/wp2-trust-specifications: topics/revocation-mechanisms.md

# Revocation Mechanisms

This section describes the artifacts that are employed in [Trust Management Process](trust-management-process.md) to manage the status of certificates and entities by detailing respective formats and parameters. The main distinction is the following:
  * To manage Wallet Relying Party Access Certificates (WRPACs), each Provider of WRPAC SHALL:
    - make available at least one revocation mechanism among [Certificate Revocation Lists](#certificate-revocation-lists) and [Online Certificate Status Protocol](#online-certificate-status-protocol);
    - issue Access Certificates with at least an extension corresponding to the provided revocation mechanism as illustrated in [Access Certificate](access-certificate.md).
  * To manage Wallet Relying Party Registration Certificates (WRPRCs), each Provider of WRPRC SHALL:

>     - make available an endpoint to request [Status List Tokens](#status-list-token);

Author: ```suggestion
    - make available the [Token Status List](#token-status-list) revocation mechanism with the corresponding endpoint to request [Status List Tokens](#status-list-token);
```

Author: @angel-palomares is this better?

    - issue WRPRC with the appropriate parameter `status` as described in [Registration Certificates](registration-certificate.md).

> ## Token Status List

Reviewer: You are using Token Status List but in the rest of the text you named as Status List Token. Is there any different between the terms? If not, shouldn't we unify the name?

Author: Token Status List is the name of the [standard](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-oauth-status-list-19.html), the Status List Token is the name of the *token* which carries the status information

  * `0x00` - `VALID` - The WRPRC is valid.
  * `0x01` - `INVALID` - The WRPRC is revoked.

For example, if two states for a certain WRPRC are possible, then $k=1$. If the Credential Issuer creates an array to store the statuses of 6 WRPRCs, whose validity statuses are 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, respectively; then:
  * The bit array can be of the form `a=[0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0; 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0; 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1]` which, in hexadecimal notation, corresponds to the byte array `[0x00, 0x30, 0x21]`.
  * The status values are encoded in specific bit positions based on their assigned index.
  * The array is then compressed using DEFLATE.

> _**Note:**_
> When the Provider of WRPRC chooses the number of bits for conveying statuses of the WRPRCs it issues, it MAY add other states besides those described above. The addition of many different states for the lifecycle of a WRPRC SHALL, however, be carefully pondered, as it discloses information to Relying Parties.

Once the Wallet Unit receives a WRPRC, it can request the Status List to validate its status through the provided URI parameter and look up the corresponding index in the list.

> ### Status List Token

Reviewer: You have a previous section called ## Token Status List, this is not the same?

Author: @angel-palomares can this be resolved in view of the previous discussion?

The **Status List Token** (SLT) is available at the Status List Endpoint. It is formatted as a JSON Web Token (JWT) signed by the Provider of WRPRC and contains the following parameters:

#### Status List Token Header

| Parameter | Defined in | Presence | Format | Description |
| :-------: | :--------: | :------: | :----: | :---------- |
| `alg` | RFC 7515 | REQUIRED | *String* | A digital signature algorithm identifier per the IANA "JSON Web Signature and Encryption Algorithms" registry. It SHALL NOT be set to `none` or to a symmetric algorithm (MAC) identifier. |
| `typ` | RFC 7515 | REQUIRED | *String* | Specifies the type of the Web Token. It SHALL be set to `statuslist+jwt`. |
| `x5c` | RFC 7515 | REQUIRED | *Array of Strings* | Contains the Base64-encoded certificate chain required to verify the SLT's signature. |

#### Status List Token Payload

| Parameter | Defined in | Presence | Format | Description |
| :-------: | :--------: | :------: | :----: | :---------- |

> | `sub` | RFC 7519 | REQUIRED | *String* | The subject claim SHALL specify the URI of the SLT. The value SHALL be equal to that of the `uri` claim contained in the `status_list.uri` claim of the WRPRC. |

Reviewer 2: think it is an important internal inconsistency in the way the status reference is named. here we say  to status_list.uri, while later the Wallet Unit is instructed to dereference status.url? or am I missing something?

Author: Corrected, thanks! renamed the `status.url` to `status.status_list.uri` as in the WRPRC

| `status_list` | OAuth Status List Draft | REQUIRED | *JSON Object* | A JSON Object that contains the Status List configurations and payload. |
| `status_list.bits` | OAuth Status List Draft | REQUIRED | *Integer* | Specifies the number of bits per WRPRC in the compressed byte array. The allowed values are 1, 2, 4, and 8. |
| `status_list.lst` | OAuth Status List Draft | REQUIRED | *Base64url-encoded String* | Contains the status values for all the WRPRCs. The value SHALL be the base64url-encoded compressed byte array. |
| `ttl` | OAuth Status List Draft | RECOMMENDED | *Integer* | Time to live claim expressed in seconds. It specifies the maximum amount of time, in seconds, that the Status List Token can be cached by a consumer before a fresh copy SHOULD be retrieved. |

The following is an example of the Status List Token payload and header prior to signing and base64url encoding:

**Header:**
```json
{
  "alg": "ES256",
  "typ": "statuslist+jwt",
  "x5c": [
    "MIIDqjCCApKgAwIBAgIESLNEvDA...",
    "MIICwzCCAasCCQCKVy9eKjvi+jA...",
    "MIIDTDCCAjSgAwIBAgIJAPlnQYH..."
  ]
}
```

**Payload:**
```json
{
  "exp": 2291720170,
  "iat": 1686920170,

>   "sub": "https://example-issuer.com/statuslists/",

Reviewer 2: here sub is /statuslists/ and we fetch in the example below from /statuslists/1?

| `hashAlgorithm.algorithm` | RFC 6960 clause 4.1.1 | REQUIRED | *OBJECT IDENTIFIER* | The OID of the hash function (e.g.,SHA-256, depending on the profile). |
| `hashAlgorithm.parameters` | RFC 6960 clause 4.1.1 | OPTIONAL | *ANY* | Algorithm-specific parameters, dependent on the hash algorithm used. |
| `issuerNameHash` | RFC 6960 clause 4.1.1 | REQUIRED | *OCTET STRING* | The hash of the issuer's distinguished name (DN), calculated over the DER encoding of the issuer's name field. |
| `issuerKeyHash` | RFC 6960 clause 4.1.1 | REQUIRED | *OCTET STRING* | The hash of the issuer's public key, calculated over the value (excluding tag and length) of the subject public key field. |
| `serialNumber` | RFC 6960 clause 4.1.1 | REQUIRED | *INTEGER* | The serial number of the target certificate for which the status is being requested. |

The `requestExtensions` and `singleRequestExtensions` structures MAY contain various extensions. A common extension is the `nonce`:

| Parameter | Defined in | Presence | Format | Description |
| :-------: | :--------: | :------: | :----- | :---------- |

> | `nonce` | RFC 6960 clause 4.4.1 | REQUIRED | *OCTET STRING* | Cryptographically fresh value used to bind a request and a response to prevent replay attacks. Identifier OID is `id-pkix-ocsp-nonce`. |

Reviewer 2: here we define nonce as OCTET STRING, but further down  line 321    nonce = BIT STRING (nonce)?

Author: Corrected to OCTET STRIG
